---
title: '《Good Economics for the Hard Times》by Banerjee & Duflo'
date: 2022-12-25
permalink: /posts/2022/12/blog-post-25/
tags:
---

We study economics, so that we provide dignity and amplify humanity. I like the fact that Benerjee and Duflo always go back to the impacts on people. "The US economy will be fine. Hundreds of thousands of people will not." And "We need social policies to reach beyond economic survival and try to restore the dignity of those whose occupations are threatened by technological progress, trade and other distruptions."

I also really appreciate how the authors are honest and say they don't know when they don't.

- Th go-go years of global growth, fed by trade expansion and China's amazing economic success, may be over, what with China's growth slowing and trade wars igniting everywhere. Slow growth is nothing new in the affluent West, but the rapid fraying of the social contract is particularly worrying. Answers to these problems take more than a tweet, so there is an urge to just avoid them.
- Only 25% people trust economists, while trust in weather forecasters was twice as high in the UK.
- Economists are more like plumbers; we solve problems with a combination of intuition grounded in science, some guesswork aided by experience, and a bunch of pure trial and error.
- Economists tend to adopt a narrow notion of well-being. And yet all of us need much more than income/consumptionto have a fulfilling life: the repect of community, the comforts of family and friends, dignity, lightness, pleasure. The focus on income is what persuades so many of us that the whole world is waiting at the door to take our well-paying jobs. It is what has led to a single-minded focus on restoring the Western nations to some glorious past of fast economic growth, and makes us deeply suspicious of those who don't have money and terrified to find ourselves in their shoes.
- Politicians toke fears by abusing facts. Unfortunately, people exposed to the false claims tend to vote for her, and this persisted after her statements were fact-checked in front of them.
- Ignorance, intuitions, ideology, and inertia combine to give us answers that look plausible, promise much, and predictably betray us. The only course we have is to be vigilant, resist the seduction of the 'obvious', be skeptical of promised miracles, question the evidence, be patient with complexity and honest about what we know and what we can know.

Immigration
- First, the wage difference actually has little to do with whether or not people migrate. While it is obvious that many people deperate to get out from where they are, the enduring puzzle is why so many others don't move when they can.
- Second, there is no credible evidence taht even relatively large inflows of low-skilled migrants hurt the locals.
- Information is not the binding constraint. When the NGO provided a randomly chosen growth of people with info about the availability of jobs in Bangladesh, the info alone had absolutley no effect. Among people given the financial support who chose to make the trip, only about half went back during the next monga season, despite their personal experience of finding a job and making money.
- Low-skilled migration might push up the demand of labor as it slows down the process of mechanization, i.e. the promise of a reliable supply of low-wage workers makes it less attractive to adopt labor-saving tech.
- Migrants may complement rather than compete with native labor as they are willingt to perform tasks natives are reluctant to carry out, e.g. mow lawns, babysit, lowering prices of such services, which helps natives workers and frees them to take on other jobs.
- Few companies hire those who just walk in and ask for a job, even if they say they would accept a lower wage. German firms did not replace their existing Germany staff with the benefit of familiarity, but sometimes hire Czech migrants instead of new native workers they don't know.
- Why people don't move? (1) Social network is deeper and stronger at home, seriving as a very desired insurance. (2) Need for a connection/recommendation. (3) Overestimate the risks. Any loss relative to the natural benchmark (letting things be) is particularly painful. (4) 
- The fear of failure is a substantial disincentive for embarking on a risky adventure. After all, most want to protect an image of ourselves as intelligent, hard-working, morally upright individuals.
- Wage gain from migration is lower for workers with a high school degree vs for high skilled workers.
- Mobility is a key channel through which standards of living can even out across regions and countries, and regional economic ups and downs can be absorbed.	

Trade
- It all comes down to the concept of comparative advantage.
- Opening trade between US and China should hurt US workers' wages (and benefit Chinese workers) becaues labor-abundant country should specialize on labor-intensive products. But US workers can still be better off if society taxes the winners from free trade and distribute the money to the losers.
- Because the place most touched by liberalization tended to be somewhat richer to start with, the fact that they did not fare particularly well after liberalization, paradoxically, reduced countrywide inequality. 
- Resources do not move easily, e.g. bankers are slow to cut credit to firms that are not doing well. Because people are terrified of being held responsible for loans that go bad, the easiest thing is to make no decision.
- For both customers and retailers, time is money.
- Branding and redistribution costs are often much larger than manufacturing costs. For many items, the cost of production is no more than 10-15 percent of the retail cost. That means cutting the cost of production by 50 percent would only reduce the overcall cost of putting the product in the hands of the uyer by at most 7.5 percent. This is the wrold of names.
- A new Japanese entrant when it first entered the US market probably benefited significantly from the success of older Japanese brands.
- In Trade Adjustment Assitance (TAA) program, a qualified worker can extend unemployemnet insurance for up to three years as long as they receive training to work in other sectors. But of the $58 per adult additional transfers that went to the more affected regions, only $0.23 come from TAA. A very big part of what did grow was disability insurance. In the US, those who join the disability rolls rarely leave them, partly because being classified as disabled hurts their employment prospects.
- Economists have traditionally been unwilling to embrace place-based policies ('help people, not place' as the slogon goes). Some argues that what public policy needs to do is to help people move to the places of the future.
- There is sth economists do know but tend to keep closely to themselves: the aggregate gains from trade, for a large economy like the US, are actually quantitatively quite small. Simply put, despite its opennes to trade, US import share (8 percent of GDP) is one of the lowest in the world, so the gains from international trade cannot be that large. International trade is much more imporatnt for smaller and poor countries where skills are scarce and so is capital.
- Do protectionist tariffs help? No. Many of those replaced by the China shock never really recovered because the sticky economy meant they could not move sector/regions to get back on their feet, and the resources could not move to them. A trade war may save some jobs in steel, it would likely cause significant new damage to others like agriculture.
-  Overall, workers awarded TAA initially had to forego $10k in earnings (since they could not work while they got the training), and the government spent some money for the training, but over the next ten years, the retrained worker earned $50k more than the untrained worker. It took ten years for the salary levels to converge (why would they converge?).

Likes, Wants and Needs
- People can have wrong beliefs but they cannot have wrong preferences. 
- Bigotry can be good business. Bakers who don't want to bake for same-sex weddings don't go bankrupt, in part because they win support from like minded people. It seems to be good politics as well.
- We give the poor food or food stamps on the grounds 'we know better what they really need'. But when a Moroccan bought a TV when there wasn't enough food, because that was a relief form the endemic problem of boredom, in these remote villages where there was often not even a tea stall to relieve the monotony of daily life. He knew what he was doing. WE should probably be willing to trust people know what they want.
- While the African American population today is much better educated than it was in 1965, the income gap between white and black men with similar education has been growing and is now as much as 30 percent. 
- Within the US, the fewer immigrants there are living in a state, the less liked they are. Nearly half of residents with almost no immigrants - like Wyoming, Alabama, West Virginia, Kentucky and Arkansas - believe immigrants represent a threat to American culture and value.
-  The phenomenon predated 2016, but Trump's election made it much easier to talk about openly.
-  Between 1950 and 2000, Hindu Muslim riots in India were much more likely to occur in a particular city in a particular year if the Muslim community happened to be relatively well off.
-  The 'ban the box' policy (restricting employers from using application forms where there is a box that needs to be checked if you have a criminal conviction) surprisingly increased racial disparities in callbacks, because without the actual info, employers assumed all black applicants were more likely to have a conviction.
-  A study finds that black students perfromed comparably with white students when told a test they were taking was a laboratory problem-solving task. However, they score much lower than whites when test takers were told the test was meant to measure their intellectual ability. Self-reinforcing discrimination.
- Hispanic students that were thold their choice may become public were less likely to sign up for a free SAT prep course (61 percent vs 72 percent), presumably because they did not want their friends to find out they had academic aspirations. 
- Psychologists these days encourage parents to tell their children not that they should be nice, but that they are nice, and all they have to do is to behave in conformity with their natural kindness. That applies to all of us.
- 41 percent Americans believe human activity causes global warming, while 21 percent say warminng is due to a natural cycle and 20 percent say there is no warming at all. It is now possible to predict the political affiliation of a congressman simply by listening to the words they use.
- In 1960, roughly 55 percent of Republican and Democrats reported they would feel displeased if their son/daughter married outside their political party. By 2010, the number is 50 percent for Republicans and 30 percent for Democrats.
- One study defines a politically engaged twitter user as those who followed at least one account associated with a candidate for the US House.
- The number of journalists in the US has plummeted from 57k in 2007 to 33k in 2015. Journalism is less of a public space (and correct information). Without proper facts, it is eaiser to indulge in nonsense.
- The first generation immigratns, legal or otherwise, are actually less likely to be criminals than native-born Americans.
- The winners does not need to deliver benefits even to his own supporters as long as the supporters worry enough about the possibility of takeover by the other side; knowing that, he or she will do their  best to stoke those fears.
- Asian students systematically have higher academic and extracurricular ratings, but lower personality ratings (i.e. leadership qualities and integrity), and once we account for that they are no less likely to be admitted than white students.
- The problem is that mixed neighborhoods have aproclivity towards being unstable. If the fraction of blacks in the neighborhood was less than some number, it remained stable; if it became higher, there was a large outflow of the white population in subsequent years.
- Prejudice is often a defensive reaction to the many things we feel are going wrong i nthe world, our economic travails, and a sense that we are no longer respected or valued.
- Ethnic or bigotted voting is often just an expressin of indifference.
- The most effective way to combat prejudice may not be to directly engage with people's views. Instead, it may be to convince citizens it is worth their while to engage with politcy issues. We eneed to restore the credibility of the public conversation about policy, and prove that it is not just a way to use big words to justify doing very little. 

Growth
- The rise of labor productivity was large enough to more than offset a declien in hours worked per head. During the second half of the century, we workweek went down by twenty hours in the US and in Europe.
- Total factor productivity is a measure of our ignorance.
- From 1973 onwards, TFP has grown at only a third of the rate achieved in 1920-1970. Starting in 1995, we saw a few years of high TFP growth but it faded quickly. Sicne 2004, TFP growth and GDP growth both in the US and the Europe seem to be back to the bad days of 1973-1994.
- The sustained growth over a long time was unprecedented does not mean it couldn't happen again. The world is richer and better educated than ever before, and the incentives for innovation are at an all time high. 
- Perhaps the way we calculate GDP doesn't capture all the well-being we enjoy (e.g. using twitter, facebook, youtube). Some attempts to calculate how much time people spend browsing on the internet instead of working nad earning money instead. However, most people with nine-to-five jobs cannot work more than that and just need to find a way to keep them amused. If they spend more time on the internet, it only means that they like it more than reading a book or hanging out with friends or family. 
- Solow (1956): As per capita GDP goes up, people save more, and thus there is more money to invest, and more capital availabe per worker. This makes capital less productive. Economics overabundant in labor on the other hand grow faster because new investment is highly productive. Any large imbalance between labor and catpial should get corrected. And eventually there is the 'natural rate of growth' depending on the effective labor force (how much people want to work and birth rate). Caveat: if a country has lots of labor and little capital, then only a fraction of the labor force will be employable at a wage sufficient to ensure their subsistence (there may be nothing for the others to do), and as a result the country will not benefit much from its labor abundance.
- However the reality is that the correlation between GDP per capita in 1960 and subsequent growth is very close to zero. Perhaps it is only because Western Europe and US are very similar that they converge...
- Lucas (1985): If capital were scarce, it should be very valuable. But in that case, why wouldn't all the capital in the US move to India? Therefore the TFP must be much lower in India.
- Romer: The force of diminishing returns holds at the individual company level, but for the economy as a whole that comes from the scarcity of land and labor was defeated by the exuberant energy that comes out of learning from each other and coming up with new ideas. That helps explains why capital does not flow to India, and high growth can keep going forever. 
- Solow's model did not provide any direction to an eager policy maker. Romer's does. Conveniently, the advice is not exactly revolutionary. The government just needs to get out of the way of stiflingincentives to work hard and invent new tech. In other words, cut taxes.
- Top tax rates were above 77 percent for the period 1936-1964 and above 90 percent for about half of that period. 
- There is no evidence taht Reagan tax cuts, or Clinton top marginal rate increase, or the Bush tax cuts, did anything to the change the long-run growth rate. 
- Using 31 tax reforms since the war, a study shows that tax cuts benfitting the top 10 percent produce no significant growth in employment and income, whereas tax cuts for the bottom 90 percent do.
- The Trump tax cut reduces corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent, the top tax rate of 39.6 percent to 37 percent, eliminates the estate taxes permanently. It has much smaller tax cuts for the rest of the population and most of which are meant to be temporary.
- We are in effect trying to explain growth with more factors than the number of countries...
- The technologies developed by the North use too much energy, too many educated workers, too expensive machines, etc. Instead of paying a premium to get them, the South need to develop its own technologies.
- A good rule of thumb in the social investing world is that 10 percent ventures work out, and only 1 percent reach significant scale. Plus a frustrating lack of interest from the people whose lives are supposed to be changed. In Kenya, villager were not willing to pay anywhere near what would have been sufficient to cover the cost of connecting to the grid (not to mention building the grid). The innovations take place in a void, insufficiently connected to the lives they wish to change.
- Where does misallocation come from? Indian firms grow much more slowly than US firms, but are alsomo much less likely to shut down. Good firms do not grow and bad firms do not die. They are related facts: good firms do not grow fast enough so bad firms can survive.
- Indian banks are reputedly extremely overstaffed, which means they have to put a large wedge between the rate they lend vs the saving rate to break even.
- In 2009/2010, 26 percent of all Indian males in 20s with at least 10 years of education were not working. Above 30s the rate was 2 percent, and with less than 8 years of education the rate was 1.3 percent. There are plenty of jobs, just not the jobs these young men wante. They will eventually take those when they get older. Part of the problem is a mismatch of expectations. 
- The wasteful public sector (paying double than private sector for no reason) eventually favors those who can afford to wait. 
- Even if China growth slows to 5 percent per year, and the US continues to bounce around 1.5 percent, it will still take at least 35 years for China to catch up with the US in terms of per capita income. The danger is that it could put the China leadership in a bind and lead them to make bad decisions in an effort to make growth come back, as Japan did before them.
- We need to remember GDP is a means not an end. THe ultimate goal remains one of raising the quality of life of the average person.

Climate Change
- If we attribute emissions to where the consumption takes place, North Americans consume 22.5 tons of CO2e per year per person, Western Europeans 13.1, Chinese 6, and South Asians just 2.2.
- A study finds that 1 degree warmer in a given year reduces per capita income by 1.4 percent but only in poor countries.
- The prospect of a free lunch is always enticing. In fact, it is so enticing that it tneds to dominate the climate change conversation, e.g. McKinsey (2009): Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the US Economy.
- If energy consumption is a bit like an addiction, then the appropriate response is high taxes, like those on cigarettes.
- For most Indians, they cannot possibly use less, and ought to have a right to use more.

Automation
- 'The problem is how to love people who have no use?' Or even have them not hate themsevles?
- 'In the long run everything will be fine.' But the long-run is really long. The luddits only recover their 1755 employement level in 1829, 65 years later. And nothing tells us that the rebound is gauranteed to happen.
- The US tax code taxes labor at a higher rate than capital. Employers have to pay payroll taxes (social security, medicare) on labor, but not on robots. If they finance capital expenditure with a loan, they can deduct the interest.
- A monopolist has no reason to constantly reinvent what it is offering to the customers, so it will tend to focus more on cost-cutting innovations that will increase its profit margins.
- 85 percent of Americans would support limiting automation to 'dangerous and dirty jobs'.
- Growhth became a matter of national pride.
- Between 1998 and 2007, employees in the financial sector, who represented only 1/5 of those in the top 1 percent in the UK, swallowed 60 percent of the rise in earnings in this group. Many talented MIT engineers and sceintest hired to do high-frequency trading, could have done sth more socially useful.
- When asked about mobility, Americans are more optimistic than Europeans. But the reailty is the reverse. Those that confront an ever-widening gap between the wealth around them and the financial woes they are experiencing, face a choice between blaming themselves for not benefitting from the opportunities they believe their society offers and finding someone to blame for stealing thier jobs.

Government
- A study in Swiss finds that taxes do not seem to discourage people from working. However, voters may still oppose taxation if they think *others* would stop working if taxes went up.
- The states in the US where people take the most pride in their autonomy are also the ones most dependent on federale subsidies (Mississippi, Louisiana, Tennessee, Montana). 

Cash and Care
- Some families wehre children were most at risk of dropping out of school opted out of the conditional cash transfer because they were not sure they would be able to meet the requirements.
- Poverty is consdiered as 'lowest class, vicious, semi-criminal'.
- In India, the government is considering moving to sending money to people's bank accounts rather than food, on the grounds that it would be much cheaper and less subject to corruption. But there is considerable oppostion led mostly by left-wing intellectuals. One of them interviewed 1200 households, among whom 2/3 preferred food to cash. When asked why, 13% quoted bank transaction costs, and 1/3 argued it protects them from misuse cash.
- Build our purpose around work vs carefully maintain connections with neighbors, relatives, cast and religious group. Our biggest risk is losing self-worth. Playing cricket or soccer or cards everyday with other village members provides a modicum of meaning.
- Flexicurity is meant to ensure job loss is not a tragedy but a normal phase of life, instead of making it difficult to fire workers on permanent contracts (like in France). We should let the market do its job and insure people who end up holding the short end of the stick.
- Retraining older employees is costly given they have relatively few years of work life left. They can moved to another role in the same area and in a similar position. 
- Young people who arrive at the creators programs have been told, all their lives, what to do, and in school and perhaps at home, that they are not good enough. They arrive bruised and wounded, with extremely low self-esteem. This translates into an instinctive suspicion of everything offered to them, and a tendency to resist suggestions.
- A competing program that simply cherry picked the most promising candidates for a self-employment program and then focused on bringing their intial project idea to fruition had no effect whatsoever, because it selected the type of people likely to succeed regardless of the help they got.
- Teens in disadvantaged neighborhoods violence may be the norm, so being aggressive or even fighting may be necessary to avoid developing a reputation as a victim.
- They are entitled to be seen for who they are and to not be defined by the difficulties besieging them. Time and again, we have seen across the world that defining people by their problem, and wrapping one into this identity has trecherous consequences for society at large. All too many politicians do not try to hide their contempt for the poor and disadvantaged. 
- Even with a shift in attitude, social protection will require a profound rethinking and an injection of lots of imagination. We clearly don't have all the solutions. We have much more to learn. But as long as we understand what the goal is, we can win.














