---
title: '《Economics for the Common Good》by Jean Tirole'
date: 2023-01-22
permalink: /posts/2023/01/blog-post-5/
tags:
---

As a profound thinker.

Introduction
- Since the resounding failure of the planned economics (due to failure to consider incentives!), the market economy has become the dominant model for our societies. The power of elected officials are restricted.
- Defining common goods requires value judgement. A thought experiement imagining you were not born helps.

Chap 1 Do you like Economics
- Our intuition frequently plays tricks on us. We are all vulnerable to, and yield to, certain heuristics and beliefs. Heuristics are rules of thumbs for thinking, shortcuts to an answer to a question. Most of the time we don't see the indirect effects or see the full picture. We all take responsibility for our limited understanding of economic phenomena, our desire to believe what we want to believe, and our relative intellectual laziness, and our cognitive biases.
- People tend to bias towards identifiable victims. Economists need to also consider unidentifiable victims, who suffer from the secondary/indirect effects (vs the patient that receive both primary and secondary effects).
- Market is just one of the many ways to manage scarcity. However it is more efficient than bribery, favoritism, and wars. For example, waiting in line may mean the price was set too low and thus the supply will always be in shortage.
- Populism can be defined as the exacerbated eagerness to exploit the ignorance and prejudice of voters.
- We should tolerate some mistakes by public officials and be constructive. 

Chap 2 Moral limits of the Market
- We resist pricing life, choosing lives between ours and others (in autonomous driving settings). Is that becuase we cannot admit who are actually are? 
- Banning organ markets limits the supply of donors. And yes the poor may be lured to sell their kidney without knowing the full consequence. It is unequal, but trying to hide from reality is no way to solve the problem of poverty. Lastly the existing of an organ market increases the opportunities (on top of stealing, robbing, enslaving, etc.) of mafia-like extortion. 
- Martial arts is banned not just to protect the comtatants, but also to protect ourselves against being disturbed by the collective enjoyment of such events.
- Luckily smart market designs like paired kidney exchange without money exchange can help, which is what economists aim to achieve.
- Indignation can easily lead to assertion of our preferences to the detriment of other's freedom (e.g. homosexuality), and lack of thorough reflection. We can better understand the foundations of morality and our fears about the commercialization of certain domains.
- Does the market threaten social cohesion, given it promotes 'selfishness'? Not necessarily. All market participants need to build TRUST in order to trade. Separating social bonds from commercial activities can prevent a villager having to bear with bad bread made by the local baker all his life.
- The rich's success: is it effort or circumstances? We have little empirical knowledge about the connection between merit and success in most countries. In absence of information, anyone can believe what they want.

Chap 5 Economics on the Move (aka irrational behaviors)
- In a narrow economic model where behaviors are only guided by stick and carrots, nobody should ever vote as no one's vote will solely change the result.
- Individuals are part of social groups, and those identities affect the image she/he wants to project to others and to himself. (To what extent are we free and truly 'ourselves'? We are a combination of all the tags we give to ourselves like.) If his community has a bad reputation, he will have little incentive to behave well because he will not be trusted anyway. (Vicious cycle.)
- The limit of incentives: (1) when outcomes cannot be attributed clearly; (2) intrinsic incentives are crowded out (e.g. paying for blood donation); (3) when clashed with social values (e.g. some societies do not allow capital punishment). 
- Homo Darwins: We sometimes take seemingly wasteful resources or risks to send a signal to our rivals or the person we want to attract.
- Homo religiosus: If clergy was financed directly by believers rather than the state or religious hierarchy, it will serve believers and religion better; Judaism required the reading of Torah and promoted literacy, which increased the Jewish community's human capital.

Chap 6 Towards a Modern State
- When technical decisions likely to be poorly undrestood by the electorate, a democratie process can be problematic.
- In France, government expenditure is still more than 57% of GDP. Meanwhile, Germany, Netherlands, the Scandinavian countries, and Canada are all countries with social-democratic traditions that have preserved both a high level of public services and cost-efficiency. Government can be an arbitrator than a major provider of employement and producers of goods/services. 

Chap 7 The Governance and Social Responsiblity of Business
- Today's business organization is overwhelmingly organized around firms that trust supervisory rights to the investors, who are usually external to the firm.
- There is often a driving need for finance. The investors will provide capital only they feel assured they could obtain from the investments. The company thus adopts a governance strcuture and commitment to reassure.
- A free enterprise economy should accomodate all forms of governance and let organizations pick whatever fit best in their context (e.g. labor vs capital shorage).
- When interests diverge, a majority may make decisions against the minority. Distrust builds to the extent that information cease to circulate.

Chap 9 Labor Market Challenges
- In 2015, unemployment rate in France was 10.6%, which affects mainly people btw 15-24 and btw 55-64 years old. In 2012, France was spending 1.4% of GDP on unemploymenet insurance, and 0.9% on training for unemployed workers, funding relevant agencies, subsidized jobs, etc.
- Subsided jobs is a resort to quick fixes. And stats has shown that the prob. of transitioning from a subsidized role to a permanent job is low.
- In 2013, 85% of newly created jobs are now temporary contracts, creating a polarization of the labor market. 
- A worker with a permanent contract also knows if he leaves the firm, his chance of getting an equivalent job is low. This leads to a feeling of pessimism that pervades the whole French society and paralyzes it.
- In France, the redundancy of a position, employee performance, or desire to cut costs are not considered legitimate reasons to layoff. It is the companies that keep their employees on that pay for the companies that fire them. 
- If paying to pollute is immoral, wouldn't not paying for pollution be even worse?
- Reducing working hours to 35 in 2000 is a false solution. 

Chap 10 Europe at Crossroads
- The single currency eliminates exchange rate uncertainty and reduce transaction costs, but also eliminates the possibility of a country's currency devaluing to restore the competitiveness to an economy experiencing a foreign trade deficit.
- Fiscal devaluation: raising tax on consumption (VAT) and thereby increasing the price of imports. However, a tax raise of 10-30% is necessary to compensate all the competitiveness loss, and that level of tax will lead to tax evasion and inequity.
- Internal devaluation: overall reduction in salaries or prices. Spain, Portugal and Greece tried and proved it to be very costly, e.g. causing households unable to paying mortgages. States also can only control the government salaries not the private sectors.
- (Consequences) Reduced savings and increased consumption translate into the need to sell assets (e.g. domestic companies) or go into debt.
- (Silver lining) Debt is less of a concern when (a) interest rate is low; (b) domestic debt; (c) economic growth remains strong.
- Government also hides lots of things behind balance sheet, e.g. state pensions, guarantee backing.
- Financial sanctions are not a good idea if a country is already in financial difficulties.
- Federalism approach: ...The asymmetry btw north and south may be corrected by identifying and isolating the problems from the past and dealing with them adequately.

Chap 13 Competition Policy and Industrial Policy
- Industrial policy: channeling public funds to benefit certain technologies, sectors, firms.
- Thinking about state intervention must start with reflection about the market failure involved (e.g. small business lack funding; private sector lack R&D investment; absence of coordination in forming a geographical cluster or industry network). 
- Industrial policy was easier post war, when it was a period of reconstruction and the investment was based on familiar technology and the demand was evident (e.g. transport, electribity, steel). Today, given no information advantage, the probability is misuse public money is not small.
- Compared to private funding, it is very hard to stop public funding from continuing investing in a failing project.
- Very often, successful government intervention are not motivated by considerations of industrial policy but by other national objectives such as defense.
- Whether or not we like industrial policies, government will continue to pursue them. Therefore, we have to try to make such initiative as successful as possible. 
- There is a certain nostalgia for the manufacturing industries, e.g. "reduction in the sector from 18 percent to 12 percent of French GDP requires a national reinvestment". It is more important to ask why this declien happened than assuming the renewal of manufactureing per se is the right objective.
- South Korea champions in industrial policy with: ensuring competition, using peer review, a limited duration for programs, and risk-sharing with the private sector.

Chap 14 & 15 Digitalization
- Two-sided platform companies enable both the supply and demand sides of the market to meet and interact. 
- If one side of the market benefits a lot (with the lowest demand elasticity) from the interactions, then the platform can charge more to the former. Platform often gorw thanks to the very low (predatory?) prices on the one side of the market, which attract users, and indirectly enables the platform to earn revenues (abusive?) on the other side.
- American Express requires that the merchant not charge a higher price to consumers using their AmEx card than cash. Similarly, an online reservation platform requires the same prices as booking through the hotel/airline websites. Thus a 15-25 percent commission charged to the hotel by Booking.com is paid in part by the customers who do not use Booking.com.
- Uber clearly adds value, but is it worth 20-25 percent levied on the driver? Is there enough competition between platforms to keep their profits in check?
- Who owns data? RadioShack promised not to share its customer data, but the data was sold when it went benkrupt.
- The posive side of having cheap health monitoring device/data is to avoid moral hazard, and allow insuers to lower premiums & deductibles forthose who behave responsibly.
- Any classification is arbitrary in defining Uber drivers who have characteristics of both independent contractors and salaried workers. Policies that make the digital platform unviable just because they are unfamiliar and disruptive. Policy intervention should fix it and not cherry-pick a specific organization form. 
- 



























