---
title: '《Psychology of Money》by Morgan Housel'
date: 2024-03-03
permalink: /posts/2024/03/blog-post-1/
tags:
---
- Money is the greatest show on earth.
- Everyone is biased. The second-hand knowledge can never be as compelling as your experiences.
- Americans spend more on lottery tickets than movies, music, video games, sporting events and books combined. "You don't understand the dream we have because you are already living in it."
- Few people make financial decisions purely based on spreadsheet. Personal history, ego, pride, marketing and odd incentives are scrambled together into a narrative that works for you.
- Before WW2, most Americans worked till death. The entire concept of being entitled to retirement is at most two generations old.
- Be careful of those who you admire or despise, because you don't know who they really are. The more extreme the outcomes, the less likely you will find it applicable. Instead, you may find more actionable takeaways by looking for broad patterns of success and failure.
- $81.5B of Buffett's $84.5B net worth came after his 65th birthday.
- Leave a margin of safety for your happiness: a frugal budget, flexible thinking, and a loose timeline.
- No one is as impressed by your wealth as yourself. They only use you as benchmark for their own desire to be liked and admired. You rarely think "Wow, that guy driving that car is cool." Instead, you think, "Wow , if I had that car people would think I am cool."
- Bubbles form when the momentum of short-term returns attracts enought money that the makeup of investors shifts from mostly long term to mostly short term.
- In 1999, Cisco's implied growth rate at that valuation meant it would become larger than the entire U.S. economy within 20 years.
- If you don't know what games they are playing, don't copy them. Don't think "Wow, maybe these other investors know sth I don't." And even feel smart about it.
- Write down your misssion statement, e.g. "I am a passive investor optimistic in the world's ability to generate real economic growth and I am confident that over the next 30 years that growth will accrue to my investments."
- Pessimism isn't just more common than optimism. It also sounds smarter. It is intellectually captivating. Tell someone that everything will be great and they're likely to offer a skeptical eye. Tell someone thye are in danger and you have their undivided attention.
- Optimism is a belief that odds of a good outcome are in your favor over time, even when there will be setbacks along the way.
- Pessimists often extrapolate present trends without accounting for how markets adapt.
- Progress happens too slowly to notice, but setbacks happen too quickly to ignore.
- Execpting things to be bad is the best way to be pleasantly surprised when they're not.
- There was one change that alien couldn't see between 2007 and 2009: The stories we told ourselves about the economy.
- Everyone has an incomplete view of the world. But we form a complete narrative to fill in the gaps. Wanting to believe we are in control is an emotional itch that needs to be scratched, rather than an analytical problem to be calculated and resolved.
- Interview questions: "What do you own and why?" Instead of "What stocks do you think are cheap?" or "What economy is about to have a recession?"
- 




