---
title: '《Central Bank 101》by Joseph Wang'
date: 2024-12-28
permalink: /posts/2024/12/blog-post-1/
tags:
---

Types of money: (1) Fiat currency (govt issued paper, $24t); (2) Bank deposits (created by commercial banks, not the govt! an IOU from a bank, 15.5t); (3) central bank reserves (issued by fed that only commercial banks can hold; an IOU from fed, 3t); (4) Treasuries (20t).

Be aware of how the financial system works, where the system may be breaking, and what  tools the Fed has available to fix them. If you understand the concepts presented throughout this book and keep on top of Fed communications, you will be well on your way to being an expert Fed Watcher. 

--
Chapter 1 Money and Banking
- Prior to 2008, Feb conducts a reserve scarcity regime where it controlled short-term interest rates by making slight adjustement to the level of reserves in the banking system, 30b. Today, fed controls short-term interest rate by adjusting hte interest it pays bnks on excess reserves and the offering rate of the Overnight Reserve Repo Facility, a program where the participants can loan money to the fed.
- *Currency in circulation*: cumulative reserves that have been converted to currency.
- *Foreign official and internation accounts*: checking account for foreign central banks, who deposit their dollars at NY fed as a secured repo loan. It doesn't hold reserves but instead hold a repo loan. 
- *Teasury General Account (TGA)*: Treasury's checking account. When tax are paid, reserves leave commercial banking system and enter into TGA.
- *Central Bank Digital Currencies*: The idea is to allow everyone to have an account at central bank. It will give the govt complete control of the monetary system, e.g. debet/credit money to anyone's account at will or lower/raise interest rate of anyone at will.
- *Treasuries*: unsecured debt issued by the federal govt, an easy way to store large amounts of money.
- *Residential Mortgage-backed securities (MBS)*: guaranteed by the govt.
- Bemindful of the March 2020 Treasury sell rush episode.
- Most currency is actually held aboard, and 80% of the 2t in circulation is held in the form of $100 bills.
- The level of central bank reserves held by banks is determined by the fed and is unaffected by the amount of loans made by commerial banks. Similarly, the level of bank deposits in the banking system is largely determined by the collective actions of commercial banks. Bank deposits are created when a commercial bank purchases an asset or creates a loan.

Chapter 2 Money Creators
- When r* is very low, Fed will do everything it can to get interest rate below r*: (1) cut target overnight interest rate to zero;(2) lower longer-term interest rates by buying lots of longer-dated treasury securities via Open Market Desk (the "Desk").
- The desk collects market intelligence through a wide network of contacts including primary/small dealers, commercial banks, govt-sponsored enterprises, hedge funds, pension gunds, corporate treasurers.
- When the fed buys a financial asset from a non-bank, it pays the reserves to a commercial bank who in term creates bank deposits. QE essentially converts treasuries into bank deposits and reserves. Forced to trade in their Treasuries for bank deposits, the nonbanks can trade their bank deposits for higher-yielding corp debt or equity.
- The Feb purchases a few trillions in assets, which is a fraction of US GDP, while BOJ has purchased assets amounting to over 100% of Japan's GDP. Hence Japanese bond market is destroyed, and only reflects the dictates of Japanese policy makers.
- Commercial banks have retail deposits and wholesale (i.e. institutional) deposits. It faces two fundametnal problems: solvency to ensure the bank deposits are backed by sound loans, liquidity to ensure those deposits are freely convertible.
- In today's fractional reserve banking system, a commercial bank only needs $5 of its own money to create $100 loans and deposits.
- How to study banks: At individual bank level, US bank publicly report detailed balance sheet data every quarter on their call reports to Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (Form FFIEC). At national level, Fed aggregate data every week through H8 data release. On Global level, Bank of International Settlements aggregate data every quarter.
- Treasury does not decide HOW MUCH debt to issue, that is determined by the federal govt's deficit, which is a result of decisions by congress. Treasury decide HOW it will go about funding the deficit.
- Central bank reserves are backed by the safe assets they purchased, bank deposits are backed by loans, but treasury is backed by nothingb ut the confidence in US govt.

Chapter 3 - Shadow Banks
- Primary dealers have the priviledge of trading directly with the Fed. They fund inventory of financial products by borrowing in the repo market using the financial products as collateral. These are typically overnight loans that they renews everyday until they are able to find a buyer for the product. There are currently 24 primary dealers, almost all affiliated with large banks.
- Dealers also borrow from one client to lend to another. For example, borrow on an overnight basis from its investors client using the same collaterals to make a one-month repo loan to its hedge fund client, and earn the interest difference.
- During Covid-19, primary dealers borrowed around $400 billion from the Fed to pay for assets their shadow bank clients (e.g. hedge funds, RETS, ETFs) were desperate to sell and scramble for cash.
- Money Market Fund (MMF) types: govt MMF and prime MMF (which also invests in non-govt securities e.g. foreign commercial banks)
- ETF is shadow bank becuase while its shares can be sold any time the market is open, the assets the ETF holds may not be as liquid.
- Mortgage REITS (mREITs) buy mortgage securities that mature in 15 to 30 years using one-month repo loans that are continuouslly renewed. They are very subject to bank run risk when they are unable to renew their repo loans.
- Private investment funds borrow medium term and invest in long term, to avoid fire sales. However, some funds do employe more aggressive strategies that rely on short-term borrowing.
- Lastly securitization...

Chapter 4 - Eurodollar market
- Eurodollars are US dollars held outside the US.
- Around 50% of global trade is invoiced in USD, and about 40% international payments are made in USD.
- Liquidity. Australian banks find it easier to borrow in USD even when they want to invest in Australian dollar assets and then enter into a USD for Australian dolloar swap trade.
- Offshore dollar market comprises (1) offshore dollar banking and (2) offshore dollar capital markets.
- *Offshore dollar banking system* is around $10t, about 1/3 of global dollar banking system. It comprises of (1) regulatory-arbitrage segments e.g. offshore banking in Cayman Islands to evade onshore banking regulatio; (2) dollar banking needs of foreigners. In recent years, most offshore dollar banking flows do not involve the US at all, e.g. a Japanese bank offering a dollar loan to a Korean company. Foreigners want dollars, so the offshore bank *creates* dollars for them to hold.
- Domestic banks can rely on stable retial deposits, while offshore banks must manage funding via money markets and FX swaps, which makes them more susceptible to bank runs.
- A foreign bank creates dollars by (1) having a Fed account (large banks); (2) using dollar deposits at a US bank to settle interbank payments (small banks), i.e. the bank deposits are as if fed reserves without limit.
- Basel III following 2008 Financial Crisis made banks safers by forcing them to hold more high-quality liquid assets like treasury and encourage them to have more reliable liabilities （such as retail deposits than borrowings from institutional investors in money markets).
- In pandemic, Fed became lender of last resort to foreign banks via FX-swap lines, where the Fed lends dollars to a foreign central bank, who in tern lends to the foreign banks within their jurisdiction.

Chapter 5 - Interest rates
- Fed theoretically controls short-term interest rates through its *control over fed funds rate (FFR)*, which is the rate commercial banks pay to take out an overnight loan for *reserves* on an unsecured basis. Historically, Fed's trading desk would estimate the demand curve for reserves and adjust the amount of reserves inte hbanking system to maintain the fed fund rate within target range. However, this has became obsolete when Fed started QE (which increased the reserves from 20b to a few t, and made it impossible to control quantity of reserves).
- Fed currently controls short-term interest rates by *adjusting the interest rate it offers on Reverse Repo Facility (RRP)* and the *interest it pays on the reserves* that banks hold in their Fed account (prior to the cirsis the Fed didn't pay interst on reserves).
- RRP: Money market funds, primary dealers, commercial banks, and a few govt-sponsored enterprises can lend ris-free to the Fed at the RRP offering rate puts a floors on the returns they are willing to accept from the private sector.
- Commercial banks may perceive federal funds as a cheap source of funding, driving FFR to trade above interest on reserves. But they still look to interest on reserves as a reference rate. 
- In practice RRP (offered to a wide range of market participants) is a much more influencial rate than FFR (available only to commercial banks).
- Long-term interst rate considerations: (1) how the Fed will set short-term interest rates in the future; (2) estimates for future inflation, (3) how volatile those estimates are, (4) future supply and demand dynamics of treasury debt issuance.
- A common framework for long-term interest rates is: expectation for the path of short-term interst rates plus a term premium.
- The short-term interest rate futures market offers a glimpse of what the market thinks short-term interest rates will be in the future. 3-month Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) rates replaced LIBOR in 2023).
- One can use SOFR rate as a baseline, compare with treasury yield to derive a term premium. In recent years (prior to 2023), the estimated term premium has been low, potentially due to low volatiltiy in inflation. A low volatiltiy for inflation can make forecasts more precise, thus reducing the level of term premium an investor requires.
- Future demand of treasury. U.S. chronic trade deficit has led many countries accumulate a large stock of dollars that they in turn reinvest to treasuries. As the Fed becomes increasingly willing to purchase treasuries (about 20% share of outstanding treasury securities), other factors affect longer temr yields appear to become less important.
- Longer-term rates are driven in part by the market expectation of future path of short-term interest rates. When yield curve inverts, the market is expecting the Fed to lower short-term rates soon, and already price in the cut. 

Chapter 6 Money Markets
- The two largest *secured money markets* are: (1) repo market, (2) FX-swap market. Repo are secured by securities such as treasuries, corp bonds, MBS or equities. FX-swap loans are loans in one currency securied by another currency, e.g. a loan for 1000 euros secured by collateral of 1000 USD.
- In repo, the prices for the transactions will be lower than the market value of the security to provide the lender with additional margin of safety. The lender will be allowed to seize the collateral in case of the borrower's bankruptcy becuase it is technically been sold to them.
- Repo market is the essential link that allows treasury securities to be money. A overnight repo market allows treasuries to be converted into bank deposits any time for virtually no cost and then returns the same treasury security the next day.
- Repo market is also a market for cheap leverage. For example, a hedge fund who wants to invest $100 in treasuries can put down $1 of its own money and borrowing the remaining $99 in a repo transaction. The next day it may close the position by paying $99.01 to purchase the treasury back, and sell it on the market at $101.
- Cash borrowers in repo market are primarily dealers and investment funds who borrow from dealers. The dealers would use the money to finance their own inventory of securities or act an intermediary and re-lends the moeny to a hdge fund client. The cash lenders are money market funds, who parked their moeny virtually risk-free, earn interest and have the moeny back in case of any investor withdrawal. 
-  *Fed's Reverse Repo Facility* offers money market funds a place to park their money at a set interest, and allows the Fed to maintain an interest rate floor. *Fed's Repo Facility* provides unlimited repo loans to primary dealers at a set rate, preventing the repo rates from rising too high (soft ceiling).
-  A 3-MO Euro-USD FX swap would be borrowing euros (receiving Euro interest rate) using USD as collaterals (paying USD interest rate). Lenders would be US investors who seek to invest in foreign assets, or foreign central banks seeking to earn a return on their USD reserves.
-  *Unsecured money markets* tend to offer higher rates than secured loans. Common instruments include CD (issued by commercial banks), commercial paper (insurance companies, bank holding company, dealer, speciality finance company, non-financial corporations) and federal funds.
-  While the unsecured moeny markets remain sizable, they are much smaller than they were prior to financial crisis. Regulators have put forth rules that make it unattractive to borrow in unsecured money markets, and hence the interbank unsecured money markets have virtually disappeared. What remains is primarily a nonbank to bank market. 

Chapter 7 Capital Markets
- Capital markets are where borrowers go to *borrow from investors* rather than from commercial banks, with tenors usually of several years. Equity markets are where a company offers an ownership interest in itself in exchange of *bank deposits*. Debt markets are where a borrower offers an IOU in exchange for bank deposits to be paid.  In a sense, it moves bank deposits to borrower who value it the most.
- In 2014, Bank of Japan became the first major central bank to begin purchasing equities （as of 2020, it owns 6% of Tokyo stock exchange).
- Higher stock prices created a wealth effect that could improve consumer sentiment and thus consumer spending.
- Debt capital markets are less glamorous than equity markets, but larger and argubly more important. However, searching for the price of a specific cusip often requires access to professional platforms, and most bonds don't trade frequently so you may not have any data on its price unless you call a dealer.
- Corporate cond ETFs hold a diversified portfolio of corporate bonds but issue shares that are traded actively throughout the day like a stock .
- Commercial banks can offer leveraged loans to companies or individuals that already have considerable amounts of debt or a poor credit history. They are not as tradable as high-yield bonds and may also come with more restrictions (i.e. covenants) on how the money may be used. Banks often originate and sell the leveraged loans into Collateralized Loan Obligation (CLO), which then securitizes the loans. The banks will retain only the highest rated senior bonds of the CLO and the rest will go to investors with higher risk appetites.
- BOJ first bought corp bonds in 2013, followed by ECO in 2016 and finally by the Fed (only 0.1% of US corp bonds) in 2020. Many market participants now are less concerned with their risk exposure as they believe the central banks will just keep bond prices high even when fundamentals deteriorate.
- A company may issues 5% rate debt to buy back equity with required return of 10%, which effectively borrowing at 5% to repay 10% obligations. At the same time, there will be fewer shares of stock outstanding so each shareholder would received more of earnings. This leads to higher stock prices purely through financial engineering.
- Agency MBS is the largest bond market in the US. Today, most mortgage loans are originated by nonbank mortgage lenders who take out a loan from a commercial bank, lend the money to a home buyer, sell hte mortgage to Fannie or Freddie. The nonbank mortgage lenders make money off the origination fees not the interest from the loan. Fannie and Freddie take the mortgage loans, add a guarantee onto them, package them into securities and return them to mortgage seller to be sold to investros.
- Treasury is auctioned by NY Fed to primary dealers who then resell the debt their clients. Primary delaers are obligated to bid on every auction, which means an acution can never fail due to lack of demand. The success of an auction can be judged by the auction award rate (lower yields are good) and degree of participation (more bids are good).

Chapter 8 Crisis monetary policy
- Commercial banks were deeply intertwined with shadow banks, e.g. they had guaranteed many obligations of the shadow banks and lent them lots of money.
- In 2020, Fed announced a new facilities that targeted at lending to small businesses through commercial banks and larger businesses through capital markets. It has demoncratized access to its balance sheet to virtually everyone but individuals.
- Judging from a decade of experience, lower interest rates appear to boost financial assets, but not necessarily real economic growth. E.g. A person may take out a loan when rate decreased from 4% to 3%, but may not taken out one when it further decreases to 2%. i.e. There may be diminishing effectiveness.  

Chapter 9 How to Fed watch 
- Highly important: FOMC statement (extremely careful use of words)/press conference/minutes/dot plot
- Moderately important: Fed official speeches/interviews/congressional testimonies, desk operating statements, Fed B/S
- Low importance: Fed research/surveys. 
- “Assymetry in max employment”: Employment higher than the Fed's est. max level would not encourage rate raising.
- Phillips curve is a conceptual link between unemployment rate and inflation, where a lower unemployment rate would generate higher inflation. Recently the curve has flattened (or the relationship has weakened), suggesting either the max level of employment is higher than the Fed est. or the relationship has changed.
- "Avereage inflation targetting": past undershoots of its inflation target would be met with future overshoot. After the announcement, the treasury yield curve steepened, suggesting at least some market participants anticipate higher inflation in the future.
- Inflation is largely a political choice. A govt can create inflation with massive fiscal spending or create deflation by massively raising taxes. Should the govt continue massive deficit spending, the chances of high inflation in the future are high.
- *Modern monetary theory (MMT)* proposes that a govt issuer of fiat currency is not constrained by taxation or debt but only by inflation. Tax and debt are merely tools through which the govt manages inflation. Therefore, deficit spending and high debt loads can be good for the economy, provided inflation is under control. The author however disagrees, saying "a monetary system is only as strong as the confidence placed in it".











