---
title: "Feb 9 notes on Treasury"
date: 2025-02-06
permalink: /posts/2025/02/blog-post-2/
---

A few thoughts.

--
Factors affecting long-term treasury:
- Amount of treasury issurance -> lower yield
- Budget deficit -> lower yield
- Flight to safety, e.g. fears of an all-out regional war, slower growth -> lower yield
- Inflation reduces the temptation of fixed rate returns & increases the likelihood of central bank raising interest rate -> higher yield 
- Tempatition for risky assets -> higher yield
- Resources: https://www.cmegroup.com/markets/interest-rates/cme-fedwatch-tool.html

Implications on the mortgage rate: 
- 30-yr mortgage rate is benchmarked against 10-yr treasury, which has duration close to average mortgage. 30-yr mortgage rate = 10-yr treasury + primary-secondary spread (industry origination cost) + secondary spread (additional risk for investing in MBS vs treasury). 
- Resources: https://www.fanniemae.com/research-and-insights/publications/housing-insights/rate-30-year-mortgage

How does maturing treasury affect Fed B/S?
- Scenario 1: Treasury uses TGA to pay off the treasury. Fed asset: treasury -100; Fed liability: TGA -100. Commercial bank balance sheet: unchanged.
- Scenario 2: Treasury issues new bonds to pay off the old treasury. Fed asset: treasury -100; Feb liability: TGA -100 + 100, Reserve -100. Commercial bank asset: Treasury (new) +100, Reserve -100.

How does MBS default on Fed B/S got written off?
- Fed asset: MBS -50; Fed liability: unchanged; Fed equity (capital): -50. The Fed’s losses reduce profits it would otherwise remit to the Treasury.

Why is saving not equal to investment (in Keynesian's view)?
- If people save too much, it can lead to a decrease in consumer spending and hence decreases aggregated demand and economic growth.
- Investment is driven by business confidence, not just interest rate.
- Y = C + G + I + (X-M). And S = I + (X-M) = Y - C - G.
- Because investment does not automatically equal to saving, the government should actively stimulate the economy by increasing government spending to increase aggregated demand. 

