---
title: "<Economics: The User's Guide> by Ha-Joon Chang"
date: 2025-02-01
permalink: /posts/2025/02/blog-post-1/
---

We all need to know sth about the diverse approaches to economics so that we do not become passive victims of someone else's decision, that we effectively resist those who try to polarize every debate, and tell us "there is no alternative". 人需自救。

There are no objective truths in economics that is independent of political and moral judgement. Even the seemingly benign Pareto criterion favors the status quo.

--
Chapter 1: What is economics
- Economics is a study of the economy rather than rational human choice.
- Money is a symbol of what others in the society owe you, or your claim on particular amounts of the society's resources.
- The most common way to get money is to have a job. To understand jobs, we need to know about skills, technological innovation and international trade.
- In standard economics textbooks, there is little recognition of production, e.g. how the factory is organized, how to control workers or deal with trade unions, and how to systematically improve tech via research.

Chapter 2: Capitalism 1774 and 2014
- Adam Smith: ultimate source of increase in wealth lies in the increase in productivity through greater division of labor.
- Capitalism is an economy in which production is organized in pursuit of profit rather than for own consumption. It is organized by capitalist, who own capital goods (or means of production).
- In Smith's time, most people did not work for capitalists, and child labor is perfectly fine. Today in rich countries, about 10% are self-employe, 15-25% work for the government, and the rest work for capitalists.
- In Smith's time, Markets were largely local except for key commodities that were traded internationalls (e.g. sugar, slaves, or spices). The small-scal firms creates perfect competition. Most banks issued their own notes to a particular person with a unique value and was signed by the cashier issuing it. It was only in 1759 that Bank of England started issuing fixed-denomination notes. And in late 18th century (Smith time) fully printed notes were issued. 
- Gold standard means the paper money issued by central bank is freely exchangeable with a specified weight of gold/silver. The US Fed kept gold equivalent to 40% of the value of currency it issued.
- 3/4 of French didn't have access to banks (saving and borrowing) until 1860s. Stock markets had been in existence for a couple of centuries by Smith's time.
- However great an economic theory it may be, it is specific to its time and space. To apply it fruitfully, we need a good knowledge of the tech nad institutional forces that characterize the particular segment we try to analyze.

Chapter 3: A brief history of capitalism
- Pre-capitalist societies changed very slowly with income per capita growing at 0.12% per year.
- 1500-1820 "The dawn of capitalism": Britain and Netherlands achieved per capita economic growth of 0.28% per year (while the rest of Europe still hovered around 0.14%), feautured by advancedments in cotton textiles and iron. It lay culture shifts towards maths, sciences, systemization of knowledge that made tech breakthrough less dependent on individuals and more transferable. And colonialism started.
- 1820-1870 "Industrial revolution": Per capita income in Western Europe grew at 1%, intially accompanied by a fall in living standards for many. Some with old skills were replaced by machines and had to work for factories for 70-80 hours per week. Rise of anti-capitalists movements arose with some tried to turn the clock back and others (e.g. Robert Owen) sought to build a better society via voluntary associations. Karl Marx suggested scientific socialism that take advantage of production units created by capitalism, abolish private ownership, and introduce central planning. British as the prioneer of protectionism and US as the champion of it ("infant industry argument"). Free trade spreads mostly through unfree means.
- 1870-1913 "High noon": New tech emerged through systematic application of scientific and engineering principles, rather than practical men with good intuition. Limited liability company, bankruptcy law, central bank, welfare state, regulated working conditions and others emerged along the way. Bank of England strated in 1844 to tackle bank failure and financial system stability. Persuit of "balanced budget".
- 1914-1945 "The turmoil": The WWI discredited the then popular view that the thickening web of commerce would make wars between nations thus intertwined highly unlikely. The Russian Revolution was an even bigger shock to the defenders of capitalism than WWI. The Great Depression of 1929 (it wasn't until 1937 that US output regained its 1929 level) where the demand level spiraled down and government was the only one that can spend more by running a budget deficit. Income tax was introduced in Sweden in 1932 (so late!).  
- 1945-1973 "Golden age of capitalism": Per capita income in Western Europe grew at 4.1% per year, US grew at 2.5%, and Japan grew at 8.1%. Many new tech developed for military purposes had civilian uses, e.g. computers, radar, jet engines, microwaves, etc. 1944 Bretton Woods Institutions i.e. IMF, IBRD/World Bank. Many European countries took private enterprises into public ownership or set up new state-owned enterprises. Widespread decolonization.
- 1973-1979 "Interregnum": Suspension of USD-gold convertibility in 1971, followed by untangling of USD and other currencies at fixed rate, and then oil shock, and lastly stagflation.
- 1980-Today "Rise and fall of neo-liberalism": Margaret Thatcher as British prime minister in 1979 lowered high-rate income taxes, reduced govt spending, introduced laws reducing union power, abolished capital control, and privatize SOEs. Interest rates were raised to reduce inflation by dampening demand, which attracted foreign capital driving up value of British pound, making British export uncompetitive. Eventually leading to a hudge recession. Meanwhile, Ronald Reagan had done similar measures. The third world debt crisis emerged. Firms had to deliver profits faster than before to prevent investor sell off. Developing countries defaulted on foreign debts because of US interest rate rise. Extremely disappointing Bretton Woods instituions interventions. Only Chile did well out of the neo-liberal policies, and all other successes extensively used state intervention and liberalized only gradually, e.g. Japan and China. The collapse of socialism. Asian financial crisis. Dot com boom. Great moderation. "Keynesian spring" and the return of free-market orthodoxy, i.e. let huge budget deficits develop with a vengeance. Austerity budgets were imposed in UK, PIIGS, and even Obama govt. Use balancing budget to prune back welfare state. 2008 crisis.

Chapter 4: How to "do" economics
1. Classical school: The market keeps all producers alert through competition, so leave them alone.
2. Neoclassical school: Individuals know what they are doing, so leave them alone except when market malfunction. Its insistence on breaking phenomena down to individual level gives it a high degree of precision and logical clarity. But one can almost justify any govt/corp/individual actions with Neoclassical econ, if he is clever enough.
3. Marxist school: Capitalism is a powerful vehicle for economic progress, but it will collapse, as private property ownership becomes an obstacle to further progress.
4. Developmentalist tradition: Backward economies cannot develop if they leave things entirely to the market. The govt can identify and deliberately promote key industries along with infant industry protection to build an economy's productive capabilities.
5. Austrian school (Hayek): No one knows enough, so leave everyone alone. "The Road to Serfdom" in 1944 passionately warned against the danger of govt intervention leading to the loss of fundamental individual liberty. Individuals are NOT rational beings. It is only through spontaneous order of competitive market that the the plans of numerous economic actors reconcile with each other. 
6. (Neo-)Schumpeterian school: Capitalism is a powerful vehicle of economic progress but it will atrophy, as firms become larger and more bureaucratic. Creative destruction. Overly focus on techonology.
7. Keynesian school: What's good for individuals may not be good for the whole economy. He invented the field of macroeconomics. Savings needs to be invested, but there is no guarantee that they will equal. In an uncertain world, investors may suddenly become pessimistic about the future and reduce their investments, leading to more savings than needed. Investment will be high enough for full employment only when animal spirits of the investors are stimulated by new tech, financial euphoria and other unusual events. A speculative market is where buying and selling are driven by expectation of what other people expect.
8. Institutional school: Individuals are products of their society, even though they may change it rules. In neoclassical econ, the only cost is the cost of production. However NIE emphasizes the costs of organizing our econ activities i.e. transaction costs. 
9. Behaviouralist school: We are not smart enough, so we need to deliberately constrain our own freedom of choice through rules. We try to be rational but our ability to be is very limited, e.g. heuristics. 

Chapter 5: Who are the econmic actors? 
- The dominant neoclassical view is that economics is the science of choice. However,corporations and government, not individuals, are the most important economic decision-makers, and they don't make decisions like individuals. 
- Internatioanl org with money: World Bank, IMF, etc; Int. org that set rules: WTO (the only one with one-country-one-vote rule), BIS, etc; Int. org that promote ideas: UN agencies and ILO offers a forum for discussions, technical assistance, voluntary declarations/conventions.
- Individuals have multiple selves, can be easily manipulated via education/religion/mass media/advertisement. Once poor people accept that the reach must deserves it and they can be rich too if they try hard enough, the life of the rich becomes easier.

Chapter 6: Output, income and happiness
-  GDP measures value added. GDP - depreciation = net domestic product (NDP). GDI (Gross Domestic Income) should be the same as GDP, but differ slightly in data sources. 
-  World GDP in 2023: 106T USD, with US accounting for 28T (26%), China 18T (17%), Germany 4.5T (4%), Japan 4.2T, India 3.6T. Most developing economies produce tiny.
-  Official exchange rate between Danish and Mexicon under-estimate the acutal living standards in Mexico. Becuase market exchange rate are largely determined by supply and demand for internationally traded goods, while what a sum of moeny can buy in a particular country is determined by the goods and services locally available.
-  Purchasing power parity (PPP) measures the value of a currency by how much a common set of goods and services it can buy in different countries.
-  By GNI per capita, Norway is the richest country with 103k in 2023. US is 80k, ranked 4th. Burundi (220) and Afghanistan (380) are the pooorest. China is 13k.
-  In PPP terms, Qatar (125k) and Singapore (119k) are the richest. Burundi （920）and South Sudan (1010) are the poorest.

Chapter 7 The World of Production
- The author defines economics grwoth as increase in an economy's productive capabilities: to organize and transform its production activities.
- For a short period, we can use overall growth rate or per capita. But for a long period, we should use growth per capita. From 2000 to 2010, GDP growth in US was 1.6% and 1.0% in Germany, but per capita growth was 0.7% in US and 1.1% in Germany.
- Share of investment in GDP is key indicator of HOW a country is developing. The world average investment ratio is 20-22%, while China is 45%. No countries have achieved atonishing growth without >25% investment ratio.
- Manufacturing sector has been the "learning center" of capitalism. "Deindustrialization" doesn't mean we are producing less, but that the prices of manufactured goods become cheaper. Also lots of services used to be provided in-house in manufacturing firms (e.g. catering, security guards, some design and engineering) are now outsourced, a reclassification effect.
- Agriculture being a lower productivity sector has rarely accounted for mroe than half of output, even when most of the people worked there. In rich countries, only 1-2 % of GDP is produced in agriculture and only 2-3% people work there. It plays an even more important role when it comes to employment. It employs 80-90% of people in some of the poorest countries. World average is 26% and China is 22%.
- Today in most rich countries, less than 15% people work in manufacturing.

Chapter 9 Inequality and poverty
- Starting from Disney animations, we tell chilchen if we believe in ourselves we can achieve anything, and we are responsible for what we get in our lives.

Chapter 10 Work and unemployment
- In developing countries, many have a job that adds very little so that they can beg without appearing to beg.
- We may have impressions that Greeks and Latinos are "lazy" but data shows they work longer than average. Such misperceptions are sometimes based on hopelessly outdated info (50-80 years). And sometimes people just blatently bbelieve poverty is a result of laziness. What makes people poor is their low productivity, which is rarely their fault.

Chapter 11 The role of the state
- Change believes taht virtually all economic success stories have been facilitated, if not necessarily orchestrated, by an active state.

Chapter 12 The international dimension
- The problem with theory of comparative advantage (HOS) is: (1) assuming all countries can use any technology they want. (2) assuming capital and labor can be remoulded for use in any sector at no cost.
- If a developing country wants to import tech, it needs to export and earn universally accepted currencies e.g. USD, as no one will accept its money for payment. International trade is therefore essential for economic development.
- (Surprisingly) US and Japan are one of the least trade dependent countries in the world. 
- How to manage trade deficit? (1) earn money in ways other than international trade ("income");(2) to be given money by someone else ("current transfer"). Income includes (1a) earnings of people working for foreign entities while being residnet in the home country, and (1b) income from financial investment abroad, e.g. dividends from foreign shares owned by a country's residents. Current transfer include (2a) workers' remittance and (2b) foreign aid. Balances in trade, income and current transfers make up the *current account balance*.
- How to manage current account deficit? (1) borrow money; (2) sell assets. Such activities are captured in "capital and financial account" (or "capital account").
- In most rich and middle-income countries, trade balances are a few percentage points of GDP. E.g. 3.9% for China and 3.5% for US in 2010. For rich countries, invesment income are typically the items that reduce the deficits created by current account.
- As long as capital keeps flowing in, CA deficits might not be a problem. But when capital inflow suddenly fall dramatically, the country can find that its assets are worth a lot less than it liabilities. And when the developing country's currency is not accepted in the world market, it can also lead to foreign exchange crisis, as they now have insufficient means to pay for their imports.
- Free boundry except for people? What rights should be given to immigrants? Freedom to choose occupations? Pay for social services free to its citizens? Conform to culture norms (e.g. ban in hijab)?
- Evidence shows immigrants benefits the recipient countires thought to a limited extent. They pay on average more tax than they claim from the welfare state, as they tend to be younger and more skilled. 








